---
title: "Diffusion LLMs can think EoS-by-EoS"
collection: publications
category: 2026
authors: Sarah Breckner and Sebastian Schuster
#permalink: /publication/2026-03-06-eosbyeos
excerpt: 'In this paper we demonstrate via behavoral experiments and causal intervention that masked diffusion LLMs use EoS tokens to make hidden computations.'
date: 2026-03-06
#venue: 'Journal 1'
#slidesurl: 'http://academicpages.github.io/files/slides1.pdf'
paperurl: 'http://arxiv.org/abs/2603.05197'
codeurl: 'https://github.com/minaolensarah/thinking_eos-by-eos'
image: /images/eos_by_eosfigure1.pdf
read_more: False
#citation: 'Your Name, You. (2009). &quot;Paper Title Number 1.&quot; <i>Journal 1</i>. 1(1).'
---

Diffusion LLMs have been proposed as an alternative to autoregressive LLMs,
excelling especially at complex reasoning tasks with interdependent sub-goals.
Curiously, this is particularly true if the generation length, i.e., the number
of tokens the model has to output, is set to a much higher value than is
required for providing the correct answer to the task, and the model pads its
answer with end-of-sequence (EoS) tokens. We hypothesize that diffusion models
think EoS-by-EoS, that is, they use the representations of EoS tokens as a
hidden scratchpad, which allows them to solve harder reasoning problems. We
experiment with the diffusion models LLaDA1.5, LLaDA2.0-mini, and Dream-v0 on
the tasks Addition, Entity Tracking, and Sudoku. In a controlled prompting
experiment, we confirm that adding EoS tokens improves the LLMs' reasoning
capabilities. To further verify whether they serve as space for hidden
computations, we patch the hidden states of the EoS tokens with those of a
counterfactual generation, which frequently changes the generated output to the
counterfactual. The success of the causal intervention underscores that the EoS
tokens, which one may expect to be devoid of meaning, carry information on the
problem to solve. The behavioral experiments and the causal interventions
indicate that diffusion LLMs can indeed think EoS-by-EoS.